Developing a Coarse-Grained Model for Bacterial Cell Walls: Evaluating Mechanical Properties and Free Energy Barriers

The bacterial cell envelope of Gram-negative
bacteria is a complex
biological barrier with multiple layers consisting of the inner membrane,
periplasm of peptidoglycan, and the outer membrane with lipopolysaccharides
(LPS). With rising antimicrobial resistance there is increasing interest
in understanding interactions of small molecules with the cell membrane
to aid in the development of novel drug molecules. Hence suitable
representations of the bacterial membrane are required to carry out
meaningful molecular dynamics simulations. Given the complexity of
the cell envelope, fully atomistic descriptions of the cell membrane
with explicit solvent are computationally prohibitive, allowing limited
sampling with small system sizes. However, coarse-grained (CG) models
such as MARTINI allow one to study phenomena at physiologically relevant
length and time scales. Although MARTINI models for lipids and the
LPS are available in literature, a suitable CG model of peptidoglycan
is lacking. Using an all-atom model described by Gumbart et al. [PLoS Comput. Biol. 2014, 10, e1003475], we develop a CG model of the peptidoglycan network within
the MARTINI framework. The model is parametrized to reproduce the
end-to-end distance of glycan strands. The structural properties such
as the equilibrium angle between adjacent peptides along the strands,
area per disaccharide, and cavity size distributions agree well with
the atomistic simulation results. Mechanical properties such as the
area compressibility and the bending modulus are accurately reproduced.
While developing novel antibiotics it is important to assess barrier
properties of the peptidogylcan network. We evaluate and compare the
free energy of insertion for a thymol molecule using umbrella sampling
on both the MARTINI and all-atom peptidoglycan models. The insertion
free energy was found to be less than kBT for both the MARTINI and all-atom models. Additional
restraint free simulations reveal rapid translocation of thymol across
peptidogylcan. We expect that the proposed MARTINI model for peptidoglycan
will be useful in understanding phenomena associated with bacterial
cell walls at larger length and time scales, thereby overcoming the
current limitations of all-atom models.