Prediction of Alkanolamine pKa Values by Combined Molecular Dynamics Free Energy Simulations and ab Initio Calculations

Knowledge of aqueous protonation constants (pKa) of chemical species is of significant importance
in
CO2 reactive absorption system design. Their theoretical
prediction has mainly relied on implicit solvent models, and the performance
of explicit solvent simulations based on classical force fields have
rarely been studied. In this paper, we report the results of simulations
in explicit TIP3P water with the General Amber Force Field (GAFF)
and with the SMD continuum solvent method for the deprotonation pKa values of 29 conformationally diverse alkanolamine
species commonly used in CO2 capture. In both cases, we
employ the Tissandier value for the hydration free energy of the proton
(“The proton’s absolute aqueous enthalpy and Gibbs free
energy of solvation from cluster–ion solvation data”,
Tissandier, M.D. et al., J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 7787–7794). The ideal–gas
reaction free energies and their uncertainties were obtained from
electronic structure calculations using five different compound methods
(CBS-QB3, CBS-APNO, G3, G3B3, G4). The hydration free energies of
the neutral and protonated forms of the alkanolamines were calculated
using the semiempirical AM1-BCC charge method, in addition to several
partial atomic charge sets based on the RESP fitting method using
electrostatic potentials computed at different ab initio theory/levels
in the gas phase as well as in the presence of the solvent reaction
field. We incorporated the Galvani surface potential of the ions in
the (pKa) calculations. Although the individual
species hydration free energies show significant sensitivity to the
charge model, the resulting pKa values
from different charge models are quite similar. Moreover, we found
that the protonated amine hydration free energies show slightly less
sensitivity to the partial charge method than in the case of the neutral
amine. While the predicted pKa values
based on the RESP charges yield reasonable agreement with the experimental
data, they are prone to occasional disagreement for molecules of complex
geometry. The best performance was achieved using the semiempirical
AM1-BCC charges, which showed a mean absolute error of less than 0.73
pKa units in comparison with experimental
data. Our results suggest that the AM1-BCC charge method may be used
to model electrolyte solutions encountered in the CO2 reactive
absorption process.