Interaction of MRI Contrast Agent [Gd(DOTA)]− with Lipid Membranes: A Molecular Dynamics Study

Contrast agents are important imaging probes in clinical
MRI, allowing
the identification of anatomic changes that otherwise would not be
possible. Intensive research on the development of new contrast agents
is being made to image specific pathological markers or sense local
biochemical changes. The most widely used MRI contrast agents are
based on gadolinium(III) complexes. Due to their very high charge
density, they have low permeability through tight biological barriers
such as the blood-brain barrier, hampering their application in the
diagnosis of neurological disorders. In this study, we explore the
interaction between the widely used contrast agent [Gd(DOTA)]− (Dotarem) and POPC lipid bilayers by means of molecular
dynamics simulations. This metal complex is a standard reference where
several chemical modifications have been introduced to improve key
properties such as bioavailability and targeting. The simulations
unveil detailed insights into the agent’s interaction with
the lipid bilayer, offering perspectives beyond experimental methods.
Various properties, including the impact on global and local bilayer
properties, were analyzed. As expected, the results indicate a low
partition coefficient (KP) and high permeation
barrier for this reference compound. Nevertheless, favorable interactions
are established with the membrane leading to moderately long residence
times. While coordination of one inner-sphere water molecule is maintained
for the membrane-associated chelate, the physical-chemical attributes
of [Gd(DOTA)]− as a MRI contrast agent are affected.
Namely, increases in the rotational correlation times and in the residence
time of the inner-sphere water are observed, with the former expected
to significantly increase the water proton relaxivity. This work establishes
a reference framework for the use of simulations to guide the rational
design of new contrast agents with improved relaxivity and bioavailability
and for the development of liposome-based formulations for use as
imaging probes or theranostic agents.