AMBER-DYES: Characterization of Charge Fluctuations and Force Field Parameterization of Fluorescent Dyes for Molecular Dynamics Simulations

Recent advances in
single molecule fluorescence experiments and
theory allow a direct comparison and improved interpretation of experiment
and simulation. To this end, force fields for a larger number of dyes
are required which are compatible with and can be integrated into
existing biomolecular force fields. Here, we developed, characterized,
and implemented AMBER-DYES, a modular fluorescent label force field,
for a set of 22 fluorescent dyes and their linkers from the Alexa,
Atto, and Cy families, which are in common use for single molecule
spectroscopy experiments. The force field is compatible with the AMBER
protein force fields and the GROMACS molecular dynamics simulation
program. The high electronic polarizability of the delocalized π-electron
orbitals, as found in many fluorescent dyes, poses a particular challenge
to point charge based force fields such as AMBER. To quantify the
charge fluctuations due to the electronic polarizability, we simulated
the 22 dyes in explicit solvent and sampled the charge fluctuations
using QM/MM simulations at the B3LYP/6-31G*//TIP3P level of theory.
The analysis of the simulations enabled us to derive ensemble fitted
RESP charges from the solvated charge distributions of multiple trajectories.
We observed broad, single peaked charge distributions for the conjugated
ring atoms with well-defined mean values. The charge fitting procedure
was validated against published charges of the dyelike amino acid
tryptophan, which showed good agreement with existing tryptophan parameters
from the AMBER, CHARMM, and OPLS force field families. A principal
component analysis of the charge fluctuations revealed that a small
number of collective coordinates suffices to describe most of the
in-plane dye polarizability. The AMBER-DYES force field allows the
rapid preparation of all atom molecular dynamics simulations of fluorescent
systems for state of the art multi microsecond trajectories.