Molecular Simulations of CO2 and H2 Solubility, CO2 Diffusivity, and Solvent Viscosity at 298 K for 27 Commercially Available Physical Solvents

CO2 and
H2 solubilities, CO2/H2 solubility
selectivities, CO2 diffusivities, and
solvent viscosities in 27 commercially available physical solvents
at 298 K were calculated from molecular simulations using the CHARMM36
all-atom force field for most solvents, and the simulation results
were compared with available experimental data. The van der Waals
radius parameters for solvents were slightly tuned to reproduce the
experimental solvent density. The simulated CO2 solubilities
are comparable with the experimental data, with an average absolute
difference of 28%. For the homologous compounds containing the −(OCH2CH2)– repeat unit, both simulated and experimental
data show that CO2 solubility decreases when the number
of repeat units is increased; CO2 solubilities in these
homologous compounds exhibit almost a perfect positive linear correlation
with the solvent free-volume fractions. The simulated H2 solubilities and CO2/H2 solubility selectivities
are also comparable with the experimental data, with differences of
22% and 17%, respectively. The H2 solubilities in all solvents
studied in this work correlate very well with the solvent free-volume
fractions, exhibiting a positive linear correlation coefficient of
0.84. Additionally, simulations show that CO2 solubility
decreases when the temperature is increased. In contrast, H2 solubility increases at elevated temperature, which is partly due
to the increased solvent free-volume fraction at elevated temperature.
Finally, although the viscosity difference tends to be large (30%–246%)
between simulation and experiment, both simulated and experimental
data exhibit a similar solvent viscosity trend. Furthermore, simulations
show that CO2 diffusivities in solvents are very strongly
correlated with the solvent viscosities and the relationship between
them is given by DCO2 = (2.6
± 0.3) × 10–9/ηsolvent0.59 ± 0.03.