Drude Polarizable Lipid Force Field with Explicit Treatment of Long-Range Dispersion: Parametrization and Validation for Saturated and Monounsaturated Zwitterionic Lipids

Accurate
empirical force fields of lipid molecules are
a critical
component of molecular dynamics simulation studies aimed at investigating
properties of monolayers, bilayers, micelles, vesicles, and liposomes,
as well as heterogeneous systems, such as protein-membrane complexes,
bacterial cell walls, and more. While the majority of lipid force
field-based simulations have been performed using pairwise-additive
nonpolarizable models, advances have been made in the development
of the polarizable force field based on the classical Drude oscillator
model. In the present study, we undertake further optimization of
the Drude lipid force field, termed Drude2023, including improved
treatment of the phosphate and glycerol linker region of PC and PE
headgroups, additional optimization of the alkene group in monounsaturated
lipids, and inclusion of long-range Lennard-Jones interactions using
the particle-mesh Ewald method. Initial optimization targeted quantum
mechanical (QM) data on small model compounds representative of the
linker region. Subsequent optimization targeted QM data on larger
model compounds, experimental data, and dihedral potentials of mean
force from the CHARMM36 additive lipid force field using a parameter
reweighting protocol. The use of both experimental and QM target data
during the reweighting protocol is shown to produce physically reasonable
parameters that reproduce a collection of experimental observables.
Target data for optimization included surface area/lipid for DPPC,
DSPC, DMPC, and DLPC bilayers and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
order parameters for DPPC bilayers. Validation data include prediction
of membrane thickness, scattering form factors, electrostatic potential
profiles, compressibility moduli, surface area per lipid, water permeability,
NMR T1 relaxation times, diffusion constants,
and monolayer surface tensions for a variety of saturated and unsaturated
lipid mono- and bilayers. Overall, the agreement with experimental
data is quite good, though the results are less satisfactory for the
NMR T1 relaxation times for carbons near
the ester groups. Notable improvements compared to the additive C36
force field were obtained for membrane dipole potentials, lipid diffusion
coefficients, and water permeability with the exception of monounsaturated
lipid bilayers. It is anticipated that the optimized polarizable Drude2023
force field will help generate more accurate molecular simulations
of pure bilayers and heterogeneous systems containing membranes, advancing
our understanding of the role of electronic polarization in these
systems.