Replica-Based Protein Structure Sampling Methods II: Advanced Hybrid Solvent TIGER2hs
In many cases, native states of proteins may be predicted with sufficient accuracy by molecular dynamics simulations (MDSs) with modern force fields. Enhanced sampling methods based on MDS are applied for exploring the phase space of a protein sequence and to overcome barriers on rough conformational energy landscapes. The minimum free energy state is obtained with sampling algorithms providing sufficient convergence and accuracy. A reliable but computationally very expensive method is replica exchange molecular dynamics, with many modifications to this approach presented in the past. Recently, we demonstrated how our temperature intervals with global exchange of replicas hybrid (TIGER2h) solvent sampling algorithm made a good compromise between efficiency and accuracy. There, all states are sampled under full explicit solvent conditions with a freely chosen number of replicas, whereas an implicit solvent is used during the swap decisions. This hybrid method yielded a much better approximation to the agreement with calculations in an explicit solvent than fully implicit solvent simulations. Here, we present an extension of TIGER2h and add a few layers of explicit water molecules around the peptide for the energy calculations, whereas the dynamics in fully explicit water is maintained. We claim that these water layers better reproduce steric effects, the polarization of the solvent, and the resulting reaction field energy than typical implicit solvent models. By investigating the protein–solvent interactions across comprehensive thermodynamic state ensembles, we found a strong conformational dependence of this reaction field energy. All simulations were performed with nanoscale molecular dynamics on two peptides, the α-helical peptide (AAQAA)3 and the β-hairpin peptide HP7. A production-ready TIGER2hs implementation is supplied, approaching the accuracy of full explicit solvent sampling at a fraction of computational resources.