Optimized Protein–Excipient Interactions in the Martini 3 Force Field

The
high doses of drugs required for biotherapeutics, such as monoclonal
antibodies (mAbs), and the small volumes that can be administered
to patients by subcutaneous injections pose challenges due to high-concentration
formulations. The addition of excipients, such as arginine and glutamate,
to high-concentration protein formulations can increase solubility
and reduce the tendency of protein particle formation. Molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations can provide microscopic insights into the mode of
action of excipients in mAb formulations but require large system
sizes and long time scales that are currently beyond reach at the
fully atomistic level. Computationally efficient coarse-grained models
such as the Martini 3 force field can tackle this challenge but require
careful parametrization, testing, and validation. This study extends
the popular Martini 3 force field toward realistic protein–excipient
interactions of arginine and glutamate excipients, using the Fab domains
of the therapeutic mAbs trastuzumab and omalizumab as model systems.
A novel all-atom to coarse-grained mapping of the amino acid excipients
is introduced, which explicitly captures the zwitterionic character
of the backbone. The Fab–excipient interactions of arginine
and glutamate are characterized concerning molecular contacts with
the Fabs at the single-residue level. The Martini 3 simulations are
compared with results from all-atom simulations as a reference. Our
findings reveal an overestimation of Fab–excipient contacts
with the default interaction parameters of Martini 3, suggesting a
too strong attraction between protein residues and excipients. Therefore,
we reparametrized the protein–excipient interaction parameters
in Martini 3 against all-atom simulations. The excipient interactions
obtained with the new Martini 3 mapping and Lennard-Jones (LJ) interaction
parameters, coined Martini 3-exc, agree closely with the all-atom
reference data. This work presents an improved parameter set for mAb-arginine
and mAb-glutamate interactions in the Martini 3 coarse-grained force
field, a key step toward large-scale coarse-grained MD simulations
of high-concentration mAb formulations and the stabilizing effects
of excipients.