Thermodynamics of N‑Isopropylacrylamide in Water: Insight from Experiments, Simulations, and Kirkwood–Buff Analysis Teamwork

The
behavior of thermoresponsive polymer poly­(N-isopropylacrylamide)
(PNiPAM), an essential building block in the
design of smart soft materials, in aqueous solutions has attracted
much interest, which contrasts with our knowledge of N-isopropylacrylamide (NiPAM) monomer. Strikingly, the physicochemical
properties of aqueous NiPAM are similarly rich, and their understanding
is far from being complete. This stems from the lack of accurate thermodynamic
data and quantitative model for atomistic simulations. In this joint
study, we have probed the thermodynamic behavior of aqueous NiPAM
by experimental methods, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, and
Kirkwood–Buff (KB) analysis at ambient conditions. From the
partial molar volumes and simultaneously correlated osmotic coefficients,
with excess partial molar enthalpies of NiPAM in water, the concentration
and temperature dependence of KB integrals was determined. For the
purpose of this work, we have developed and employed a novel NiPAM
force field, which not only reproduces KB integrals (Gij) and adequately captures macroscopic
thermodynamic quantities but also provides more accurate structural
insight than the original force fields. We revealed in the vicinity
of NiPAM the competing effect of amide hydration with interaction
between nonpolar regions. This microscopic picture is reflected in
the experimentally observed NiPAM–NiPAM association, which
is present from highly dilute conditions up to the solubility limit
and is evidenced by G22. From intermediate
concentrations, it is accompanied by the existence of apparent dense-water
regions, as indicated by positive G11 values.
The here-employed KB-based framework provided a mutually consistent
thermodynamic and microscopic insight into the NiPAM solution and
may be further extended for ion-specific effects. Moreover, our findings
contribute to the understanding of thermodynamic grounds behind PNiPAM
collapse transition.