Comparative Assessment of Water Models in Protein–Glycan Interaction: Insights from Alchemical Free Energy Calculations and Molecular Dynamics Simulations

Accurate computational simulations of protein–glycan
dynamics
are crucial for a comprehensive understanding of critical biological
mechanisms, including host–pathogen interactions, immune system
defenses, and intercellular communication. The accuracy of these simulations,
including molecular dynamics (MD) simulation and alchemical free energy
calculations, critically relies on the appropriate parameters, including
the water model, because of the extensive hydrogen bonding with glycan
hydroxyl groups. However, a systematic evaluation of water models’
accuracy in simulating protein–glycan interaction at the molecular
level is still lacking. In this study, we used full atomistic MD simulations
and alchemical absolute binding free energy (ABFE) calculations to
investigate the performance of five distinct water models in six protein–glycan
complex systems. We evaluated water models’ impact on structural
dynamics and binding affinity through over 5.8 μs of simulation
time per system. Our results reveal that most protein–glycan
complexes are stable in the overall structural dynamics regardless
of the water model used, while some show obvious fluctuations with
specific water models. More importantly, we discover that the stability
of the binding motif’s conformation is dependent on the water
model chosen when its residues form weak hydrogen bonds with the glycan.
The water model also influences the conformational stability of the
glycan in its bound state according to density functional theory (DFT)
calculations. Using alchemical ABFE calculations, we find that the
OPC water model exhibits exceptional consistency with experimental
binding affinity data, whereas commonly used models such as TIP3P
are less accurate. The findings demonstrate how different water models
affect protein–glycan interactions and the accuracy of binding
affinity calculations, which is crucial in developing therapeutic
strategies targeting these interactions.