Force-Field-Based Computational Study of the Thermodynamics of a Large Set of Aqueous Alkanolamine Solvents for Post-Combustion CO2 Capture

The ability to predict the thermodynamic
properties of amine species
in CO2-loaded aqueous solutions, including their deprotonation
(pKa) and carbamate to bicarbonate reversion
(pKc) equilibrium constants and their
corresponding standard reaction enthalpies, is of critical importance
for the design of improved carbon capture solvents. In this study,
we used isocoulombic forms of both reactions to determine these quantities
for a large set of aqueous alkanolamine solvent systems. Our hybrid
approach involves using classical molecular dynamics simulations with
the general amber force field (GAFF) and semi-empirical AM1–BCC
charges (GAFF/AM1–BCC) in the solution phase, combined with
high-level composite quantum chemical ideal-gas calculations. We first
determined a new force field (FF) for the hydronium ion (H3O+) by matching to the single experimental pKa data point for the well-known monoethanolamine system
at 298.15 K. We then used this FF to predict the pKa values for 76 other amines at 298.15 K and for all 77
amines at elevated temperatures. Additionally, we indirectly relate
the H3O+ hydration free energy to that of H+ and provide expressions for intrinsic hydration free energy
and enthalpy of the proton. Using the derived H3O+ FF, we predicted the pKa values of a
diverse set of alkanolamines with an overall average absolute deviation
of less than 0.72 pKa units. Furthermore,
the derived H3O+ FF is able to predict the protonation
enthalpy of these amines when used with the GAFF. We also predicted
the carbamate reversion constants of the primary and secondary amine
species in the data set and their corresponding standard heats of
reaction, which we compared with the scarcely available experimental
data, which are often subject to significant uncertainty. Finally,
we also described the influence of electronic and steric effects of
different molecular fragments/groups on the stabilities of the carbamates.