Allosteric Cooperativity Mechanism Investigation of Orthosteric and Allosteric Ligands in Modulating AR Activity: A Molecular Dynamics Study

The androgen receptor (AR) represents a pivotal therapeutic
target
for prostate cancer. However, existing orthosteric ligand-binding
pocket (LBP) antagonists [e.g., enzalutamide (ENZ)] encounter significant
obstacles due to resistance-conferring mutations in the LBP. Allosteric
antagonists targeting the BF3 site exhibit great potential in overcoming
such resistance but have low inhibitory efficacy. In our study, we
employed an integrated computational modeling strategy, including
Gaussian-accelerated molecular dynamics (GaMD), MM/GBSA free-energy
calculations, and elastic network model (ENM)-based signaling communication
pathway analyses. This approach is used to probe the cooperativity
of allosteric BF3 antagonists [e.g., VPC-13808 (VPC)] with diverse
orthosteric LBP ligands [e.g., ENZ and testosterone (TES)] in suppressing
AR activity. Herein, four types of AR systems were examined: AR bound
to LBP agonist (AR·TES), LBP antagonists (e.g., AR·ENZ),
and combinations of LBP agonist/antagonist with BF3 antagonist (e.g.,
AR·TES·VPC and AR·ENZ·VPC). Results indicate that
BF3 antagonists can synergize with the LBP antagonist to amplify conformational
flexibility in H12 and induce anticorrelated dynamics of H12 with
H3 and H4. This induces the downward movement of H12 and its displacement
away from H3/H4, triggering the wide opening of the AF2 binding cleft
and substantially reducing the coactivator recruitment. Furthermore,
the BF3 antagonist can interact with specific residues (e.g., F673,
F826, L830, and Y834) and cooperate with the LBP agonist or antagonist
to allosterically perturb the AF2 conformation. Multiple short- and/or
long-range BF3→AF2 and LBP→AF2 signaling transition
pathways are involved, such as F673→Y834→L722→L812→L744→V746→L873→ENZ→L880/V889/V891.
These mechanistic insights establish the foundation for developing
novel AR BF3 antagonist and LBP-BF3 combination therapies, suggesting
a promising avenue for enhancing the efficacy and overcoming the resistance
in castration-resistant prostate cancer treatment.