Molecular Insights into the Covalent Binding of Zoxamide to the β‑Tubulin of Botrytis cinerea

Botrytis cinerea is a fungal plant pathogen
that
causes significant economic losses in the agricultural industry worldwide.
Fungicides that target microtubules, such as carbendazim (CBZ), diethofencarb
(DEF), and zoxamide (ZOX), are widely used in crop protection against
this pathogen. These groups of compounds exert their fungicidal activity
by disrupting the microtubule assembly by binding to the β-tubulin
subunit, provoking cell-cycle arrest and cell death. However, with
the appearance of isolates resistant to these compounds, it is necessary
to search for new alternatives to control this pathogenic fungus.
In this work, we gained insight into the binding and stability of
these fungicides in the benzimidazole binding site of B. cinerea β-tubulin through different computational approaches. Our
molecular dynamics simulation replicas showed that R enantiomers of ZOX and its analog RH-4032 had better interaction
profiles at the site compared to S enantiomers. The
simulations also revealed that while the R-isomer
fungicides formed H-bonds with the main chain carbonyl of V236 or
the side chain residue of S314, only CBZ interacted with E198. Previous
experimental data have identified key mutations in B. cinerea’s β-tubulin gene that lead to the development of resistance
or, on the contrary, increased sensitivity for treatment with these
fungicide compounds. In agreement with experimental findings, alchemical
free energy calculations showed that E198A and E198V mutations in B. cinerea β-tubulin have high sensitivity to (R)-ZOX, whereas the E198K mutation decreased its affinity.
Similarly, the results obtained explain the resistance to CBZ of B. cinerea isolates with E198A/V/K mutations and the insensitivity
of the wild-type organism to DEF. Our work provides a deeper insight
into the molecular mechanism of action of these fungicides, highlighting
the importance of understanding the interaction profiles to develop
more effective antifungal agents.