Data for 'Ranking Single Fluorescent Protein Based Calcium Biosensor Performance by Molecular Dynamics Simulations'
Melike Berksoz, Canan Atilgan* 
Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Sabanci University 
*Correspondance: Canan Atilgan, Faculty of Natural Sciences and Engineering, Sabancı University, Tuzla 34956 Istanbul, Türkiye, E-mail: canan@sabanciuniv.edu
Genetically Encoded Fluorescent Biosensors (GEFBs) have become indispensable tools for visualizing biological processes in vivo. A typical GEFB is composed of a sensory domain (SD) which undergoes a conformational change upon ligand binding and a genetically fused fluorescent protein (FP). Ligand binding in the SD allosterically modulates the chromophore environment and changes its spectral properties. Single fluorescent (FP)-based biosensors, a subclass of GEFBs, offer a simple experimental setup; they are easy to produce in living cells, structurally stable and simple due to their single-wavelength operation. However, they pose a significant challenge for structure optimization, especially concerning the length and residue content of linkers between the FP and SD which effect how well the chromophore responds to conformational change in the SD. In this work, we use classical all-atom molecular dynamics simulations to analyze the dynamic properties of a series of calmodulin-based calcium biosensors, all with different FP-SD interaction interfaces and varying degrees of calcium binding dependent fluorescence change. Our results indicate that biosensor performance can be predicted based on distribution of water molecules around the chromophore and shifts in hydrogen bond occupancies between the ligand-bound and ligand-free sensor structures.
Hydrogen bond occupancies were calculated with merging_bonds.py script. Double counted hydrogen bonds where a residue acts both as acceptor and donor are merged into a single entry with merge_files.py. To run sasa.tcl, you need VMD software. Trajectories were created with NAMD2 with a dcdfrequency of 5000 timesteps (every 10 ps) and strided in a 1:100 ratio (every 1 ns=1 frame in dcd). 